---
layout: post
title:  "The Fourier transform"
date:   2018-02-25 21:00:0 +0100
categories: misc physics
---

First post of 2018! Exactly two months after my last one. I have been short
on topics to write about these past months, but finally here we are!

The inspiration for this post is simply giving a recommendation: [3Blue1Brown](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYO_jab_esuFRV4b17AJtAw), a
YouTube channel dedicated to explaning math concepts, has recently published two
videos on the Fourier transform: [video 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=spUNpyF58BY) and [video 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MBnnXbOM5S4).

I've long admired 3Blue1Brown as perhaps the
best scientific channel on YouTube (among those I know, clearly): it has intriguing
ideas for topics, clear explanations with intuitive concepts and good animations.
You watch raptly for 20-30 minutes and when it's over, you learned some
cool stuff and you didn't even need to take notes or follow complex proofs.

These last two videos have reinforced this opinion:
despite having studied the Fourier transform in university, not surprising
given that I studied computer engineering, the video taught me quite a bit about what the
transform itself represents. And the big surprise came in the second video,
where instead of continuing on the path set in the first one, the author
explained the surprisingly intuitive relationship between the Fourier transform
of a wave, and what it can be used for, and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
for quantum particles. Having studied a bit of quantum mechanics as a pastime,
I found this both super enticing and mindblowing. Thanks, 3Blue1Brown, for
making my weekend.

Since I started down that path, let me mention one of the first videos I
watched, which is still one my favourites: [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AmgkSdhK4K8) on the Moebius strip.
Like many others, I knew of the Moebius strip as a nice theoretical concept,
an example of why math is weird and is able to describe complex or impossible
structures. But what does the Moebius strip come from? It must have arisen
from somewhere: a tool to describe a phenomenon or to solve a specific problem.
And indeed the video will tell you the full story, and damn now I want more
hours in my day to study topology...

Studying some topic I am interested in as a hobby is
one of my favourite things to do. Studying for me might mean read one book; watch
a series of videos; or follow a full online course from beginning to end (in-person
course counts too, although that's generally harder to organize and fit in our busy lives).
Or even just find a problem that makes me curious and try and solve it. This
depends on the topic, my level of interest, my current amount of free time...

This started with computer science, at the time where I was a high school student
with tons of free time to spare, and a desire to really know how computers
worked and program them to do what I wanted. At the time I felt like an alien:
nobody around me saw "study" as nothing more than a boring necessity. Sure, there were
plenty of subjects I didn't care for, and teachers with whom I didn't click.
Liking everything is impossible. But there was always at least one topic that
made my eyes sparkle so much I would read the textbook way beyond what was covered in the
 lessons to know more. That lesson where they would explain some new concept and it just
left me standing there in awe. I remember the first time they told me what
an integral is and how they work...

Nowadays I can easily meet people with similar attitudes all over Internet, so
my hobby studying is not that weird or isolated. But if you have never done it, I recommend
it. The feeling of spending time over a hard topic and finally having that
moment of clarity is always worth it.

So what's next on my list? Not topology for now. I recently read a couple of
cool books about the science behind cooking, and wrote down a bunch of notes.
With some time and processing, I plan for them to become a blog post.
